\input texinfo
@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@c@setfilename guile.info
@documentencoding UTF-8
@settitle Guile Reference Manual
@set guile
@set MANUAL-REVISION 1
@c %**end of header
@include version.texi
@include effective-version.texi

@copying
This manual documents Guile version @value{VERSION}.

Copyright (C) 1996-1997, 2000-2005, 2009-2020 Free Software Foundation,
Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A
copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free
Documentation License.''
@end copying


@c Notes
@c
@c We no longer use the category "primitive" to distinguish C-defined
@c Scheme procedures from those defined in Scheme.  Instead, the
@c reference manual now includes a C declaration as well as a Scheme
@c declaration for each procedure that is available in both Scheme and
@c C.
@c
@c When adding a new reference entry to the Guile manual, please
@c document it with @deffn using one of the following categories:
@c
@c   {Scheme Procedure}
@c   {Scheme Syntax}
@c   {C Function}
@c   {C Macro}
@c
@c If the entry is for a new primitive, it should have both a @deffn
@c {Scheme Procedure} line and a @deffnx {C Function} line; see the
@c manual source for plenty of existing examples of this.
@c
@c For {C Function} entries where the return type and all parameter
@c types are SCM, we omit the SCMs.  This is easier to read and also
@c gets round the problem that Texinfo doesn't allow a @deftypefnx
@c inside a @deffn.
@c
@c For a list of Guile primitives that are not yet incorporated into the
@c reference manual, see the file `new-docstrings.texi', which holds all
@c the docstrings snarfed from the libguile C sources for primitives
@c that are not in the reference manual.  If you have worked with some
@c of these concepts, implemented them, or just happen to know what they
@c do, please write up a little explanation -- it would be a big help.
@c Alternatively, if you know of any reason why some of these should
@c *not* go in the manual, please let the mailing list
@c <guile-devel@gnu.org> know.

@c Define indices that are used in the Guile Scheme part of the
@c reference manual to group stuff according to whether it is R5RS or a
@c Guile extension.
@defcodeindex rn

@c vnew - For (some) new items, indicates the Guile version in which
@c item first appeared.  In future, this could be made to expand to
@c something like a "New in Guile 45!" banner.
@macro vnew{VERSION}
@end macro


@c  The following, @le{} and @ge{}, are standard tex directives, given
@c  definitions for use in non-tex.
@c
@ifnottex
@macro ge
>=
@end macro
@macro le
<=
@end macro
@end ifnottex

@c  @cross{} is a \times symbol in tex, or an "x" in info.  In tex it works
@c  inside or outside $ $.
@tex
\gdef\cross{\ifmmode\times\else$\times$\fi}
@end tex
@ifnottex
@macro cross
x
@end macro
@end ifnottex

@c  @m{T,N} is $T$ in tex or @math{N} otherwise.  This is an easy way to give
@c  different forms for math in tex and info.
@iftex
@macro m {T,N}
@tex$\T\$@end tex
@end macro
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@macro m {T,N}
@math{\N\}
@end macro
@end ifnottex

@c  @nicode{S} is plain S in info, or @code{S} elsewhere.  This can be used
@c  when the quotes that @code{} gives in info aren't wanted, but the
@c  fontification in tex or html is wanted.  @alias is used rather
@c  than @macro because backslashes don't work properly in an @macro.
@ifinfo
@alias nicode=asis
@end ifinfo
@ifnotinfo
@alias nicode=code
@end ifnotinfo


@c @iftex
@c @cropmarks
@c @end iftex

@c@dircategory The Algorithmic Language Scheme
@c@direntry
@c* Guile Reference: (guile).     The Guile reference manual.
@c@end direntry

@setchapternewpage odd

@titlepage
@sp 10
@comment The title is printed in a large font.
@title Guile Справочное Руководство
@subtitle Издание @value{EDITION}, пересмотр @value{MANUAL-REVISION}, для использования с Guile @value{VERSION}
@c @subtitle $Id: guile.texi,v 1.49 2008-03-19 22:51:23 ossau Exp $

@c See preface.texi for the list of authors
@author The Guile Developers

@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c @smallbook
@finalout
@headings double

@c Where to find Guile examples.
@set example-dir doc/examples

@ifnottex
@node Top, Preface, (dir), (dir)
@top Guile Справочное Руководство

@insertcopying
@sp 1
@end ifnottex

@menu

* Preface::
* Introduction::

* Hello Guile!::
* Hello Scheme!::

* Programming in Scheme::
* Programming in C::

* API Reference::

* Guile Modules::

* GOOPS::

* Guile Implementation::

Приложения

* GNU Free Documentation License::  Лицензия данного руководства.

Содержание

* Concept Index::
* Procedure Index::
* Variable Index::
* Type Index::
* R5RS Index::

@end menu

@contents

@include preface.texi

@include intro.texi

@include tour.texi

@include scheme-ideas.texi
@include scheme-reading.texi

@node Programming in Scheme
@chapter Программирование в Scheme

Базовым языком Guile является язык Scheme, и многое может быть достигнуто
лишь с помощью Guile - написание и запуск программ Scheme --- в отличие от
того, чтобы погрузиться в код C.  В этой части руководства объясняется, как
использовать Guile в этом режиме, и описываются инструменты, которыми Guile
обеспечивает, чтобы помочь написать сценарий, отладить и упаковать программу
для распространения.

Для получения более подробной справочной информации о переменных, функциях и
так далее, которые составляют интерфейс прикладного программирования (API)
Guile, смотреть @ref{API Reference}.

@menu
* Guile Scheme::                Guile реализация Scheme.
* Invoking Guile::              Дополнительные функции при запуске Guile.
* Guile Scripting::             Как писать скрипты Guile.
* Using Guile Interactively::   Особенности Guile REPL.
* Using Guile in Emacs::        Guile и Emacs.
* Using Guile Tools::           Использование guild мастерами Scheme.
* Installing Site Packages::    Установка кода Scheme.
* Distributing Guile Code::     Создание и распространение кода.
@end menu

@include scheme-intro.texi
@include guile-invoke.texi
@include scheme-scripts.texi
@include scheme-using.texi

@node Programming in C
@chapter Программирование в C

Эта часть руководства объясняет общие понятия, которые требуется понимать,
когда взаимодействие с Guile исходит от C.  Объясняется о том, как скрытая
типизация Scheme встроена в статической типизации С, как вывоз сборщика
мусора из Guile становятся доступным из C кода, и как расширения влияют на
поток управления в программе C.

Эти знания должны сделать простым делом,  добавить новые функции Guile,
которые могут быть вызваны из Scheme.  Добавление новых типов данных, также
возможно и осуществляется путем определения @dfn{foreign objects}.

Раздел части @ref{Programming Overview} содержит общие размышления и принципы
о программировании с Guile.  Исследуются различные способы для разработки
программы в среде Guile, или как вставить Guile в существующие программы.

Педагогическое, но ещё и подробное объяснение того, как реализуется
представление данных Guile, @xref{Data Representation}.  Не требуется знать
подробности, приведенные здесь для использовать Guile из C, но они полезны,
когда требуется изменить Guile самому или когда просто есть желание знать,
как это все делается.

For detailed reference information on the variables, functions
etc. that make up Guile's application programming interface (API),
@xref{API Reference}.

@menu
* Parallel Installations::      Finding the right Guile.
* Linking Programs With Guile:: More precisely, with the libguile library.
* Linking Guile with Libraries::  To extend Guile itself. 
* General Libguile Concepts::   General concepts for using libguile.
* Defining New Foreign Object Types::  Adding new types to Guile.
* Function Snarfing::           A way to define new functions.
* Programming Overview::        An overview of Guile programming.
* Autoconf Support::            Putting m4 to good use.
@end menu

@include libguile-parallel.texi
@include libguile-linking.texi
@include libguile-extensions.texi
@include libguile-concepts.texi
@include libguile-foreign-objects.texi
@include libguile-snarf.texi
@include libguile-program.texi
@include libguile-autoconf.texi


@node API Reference
@chapter API Reference

Guile provides an application programming interface (@dfn{API}) to
developers in two core languages: Scheme and C.  This part of the manual
contains reference documentation for all of the functionality that is
available through both Scheme and C interfaces.

@menu
* API Overview::                Overview of the Guile API.
* Deprecation::                 Obsolete back-compatible APIs.
* The SCM Type::                The fundamental data type for C code.
* Initialization::              Initializing Guile.
* Snarfing Macros::             Macros for snarfing initialization actions.
* Data Types::                  Representing values in Guile.
* Foreign Objects::             Defining new data types in C.
* Smobs::                       Use foreign objects instead.
* Procedures::                  Procedures.
* Macros::                      Extending the syntax of Scheme.
* Utility Functions::           General utility functions.
* Binding Constructs::          Definitions and variable bindings.
* Control Mechanisms::          Controlling the flow of program execution.
* Input and Output::            Ports, reading and writing.
* Regular Expressions::         Pattern matching and substitution.
* LALR(1) Parsing::             Generating LALR(1) parsers.
* PEG Parsing::                 Parsing Expression Grammars.
* Read/Load/Eval/Compile::      Reading and evaluating Scheme code.
* Memory Management::           Memory management and garbage collection.
* Modules::                     Designing reusable code libraries.
* Foreign Function Interface::  Interacting with C procedures and data.
* Scheduling::                  Threads, mutexes, asyncs and dynamic roots.
* Options and Config::          Configuration, features and runtime options.
* Other Languages::             Emacs Lisp, ECMAScript, and more.
* Internationalization::        Support for gettext, etc.
* Debugging::                   Debugging infrastructure and Scheme interface.
* Code Coverage::               Gathering code coverage data.
@end menu

@include api-overview.texi
@include api-deprecated.texi
@include api-scm.texi
@include api-init.texi
@include api-snarf.texi
@include api-data.texi
@include api-foreign-objects.texi
@include api-smobs.texi
@include api-procedures.texi
@include api-macros.texi
@include api-utility.texi
@include api-binding.texi
@include api-control.texi
@include api-io.texi
@include api-regex.texi
@include api-lalr.texi
@include api-peg.texi
@include api-evaluation.texi
@include api-memory.texi
@include api-modules.texi
@include api-foreign.texi
@include api-scheduling.texi
@c object orientation support here
@include api-options.texi
@include api-languages.texi
@include api-i18n.texi
@include api-debug.texi
@include api-coverage.texi

@node Guile Modules
@chapter Guile Modules

@menu
* SLIB::                        Using the SLIB Scheme library.
* POSIX::                       POSIX system calls and networking.
* Web::                         HTTP, the web, and all that.
* getopt-long::                 Command line handling.
* SRFI Support::                Support for various SRFIs.
* R6RS Support::                Modules defined by the R6RS.
* R7RS Support::                Modules defined by the R7RS.
* Pattern Matching::            Generic pattern matching constructs.
* Readline Support::            Module for using the readline library.
* Pretty Printing::             Nicely formatting Scheme objects for output.
* Formatted Output::            The @code{format} procedure.
* File Tree Walk::              Traversing the file system.
* Queues::                      First-in first-out queuing.
* Streams::                     Sequences of values.
* Buffered Input::              Ports made from a reader function.
* Expect::			Controlling interactive programs with Guile.
* sxml-match::                  Pattern matching of SXML.
* The Scheme shell (scsh)::     Using scsh interfaces in Guile.
* Curried Definitions::         Extended @code{define} syntax.
* Statprof::                    An easy-to-use statistical profiler.
* SXML::                        Parsing, transforming, and serializing XML.
* Texinfo Processing::          Munging documents written in Texinfo.
@end menu

@include slib.texi
@include posix.texi
@include web.texi
@include mod-getopt-long.texi
@include srfi-modules.texi
@include r6rs.texi
@include r7rs.texi
@include match.texi
@include repl-modules.texi
@include misc-modules.texi
@include expect.texi

@c XXX: Would be nicer if it were close to the (sxml simple) documentation.
@include sxml-match.texi

@include scsh.texi
@include curried.texi

@include statprof.texi
@include sxml.texi
@include texinfo.texi

@include goops.texi

@node Guile Implementation
@chapter Guile Implementation

At some point, after one has been programming in Scheme for some time,
another level of Scheme comes into view: its implementation. Knowledge
of how Scheme can be implemented turns out to be necessary to become
an expert hacker. As Peter Norvig notes in his retrospective on
PAIP@footnote{PAIP is the common abbreviation for @cite{Paradigms of
Artificial Intelligence Programming}, an old but still useful text on
Lisp. Norvig's retrospective sums up the lessons of PAIP, and can be
found at @uref{http://norvig.com/Lisp-retro.html}.}, ``The expert Lisp
programmer eventually develops a good `efficiency model'.''

By this Norvig means that over time, the Lisp hacker eventually
develops an understanding of how much her code ``costs'' in terms of
space and time.

This chapter describes Guile as an implementation of Scheme: its
history, how it represents and evaluates its data, and its compiler.
This knowledge can help you to make that step from being one who is
merely familiar with Scheme to being a real hacker.

@menu
* History::                          A brief history of Guile.
* Data Representation::              How Guile represents Scheme data.
* A Virtual Machine for Guile::      How compiled procedures work.
* Compiling to the Virtual Machine:: Not as hard as you might think.
@end menu

@include history.texi
@include data-rep.texi
@include vm.texi
@include compiler.texi

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl.texi

@include indices.texi
@include scheme-indices.texi

@bye
